# create-microbundle-module

Bootstrap your development environment for creating small javascript libraries
with no hassle 🎉

## Quick Start

```sh
npm init microbundle-module my-awesome-module
cd my-awesome-module
npm start
```

That last command will start [Jest testing framework][jest] in the `--watch`
mode.

Using your tests in the watch mode is the suggested approach for developing your
library with this environment setup.

When you are done, you can prepare your module for publishing with
`npm run build`

## Background

For a while now I found myself doing the same repetetive process every time I
want to create a small open source library:

- Set up a new project folder structure and initial entry, test files
- Initialize new Git repository
- Install linting, code-formatting, bundling, testing tools
- Set up pre-commit git hooks
- Make an initial commit

So based on that, I decided to normalize all those processes into one toolbox.

## OMG, do I really need all that to share code with people?

Depends! 😉

**I can't stress this enough**, but this is perfectly fine to just do cool stuff
in the easiest way possible and publish it in any way that is more comfortable
for you: [`glitch`][glitch], [`npm`][npm], [`github`][github],
[`bitbucket`][bitbucket], [`gitlab`][gitlab], [`github gists`][gists], tweets,
just a file somewhere in the internet, a piece of paper in your pocket, there
are so many options around!

Choose whatever suits you and makes you happy sharing stuff with others and go
for it! 🎉

Hovewer, if your workflow looks something like the one provided in this tool,
you might find this usefull.

## What's in the package?

### `create-microbundle-module`

First of all, there is `create-microbundle-module` CLI that will help you to
bootstrap the project.

```
Usage:

  create-microbundle-module [options] <module-directory>

Options:

  -t, --target   Your module target environment: web, node (default web)
```

Calling this CLI can be done in many different ways, here are a few examples:

```sh
# With an awesome npx tool (npx <command> is available with npm 5.2+ and higher)
npx create-microbundle-module awesome-lib
```

```sh
# With npm init (npm init <initializer> is available with npm 6+)
npm init microbundle-module awesome-lib
# ... or with yarn create (yarn create <initializer> is available with Yarn 0.25+)
yarn create microbundle-module awesome-lib
```

```sh
# Or with a good old global install
npm install -g create-microbundle-module
create-microbundle-module awesome-lib
```

### `microbundle-module-scripts`

If your `microbundle-module <module-directory>` command finished bootstrap
process successfully, you now have enviroment ready to work with. Go to your
`module directory` and hack away!

Now we will go into more details what is provided with this toolbox:

Here is the resulting folder structure:

```
TODO:
```

1.  Git repository will be already initialized and first "bootstrap commit" will
    be created.
2.  Main entry point will have the same name as the module and will be in the
    `src` folder.
3.  Main test file for the source entry point will be in
    `test/<module-name>.test.js` file.
4.  Autogenerated `package.json` will have `microbundle-module-scripts` already
    installed and will have a few `scrips` and some husky `hooks` already setup
    for you.

Let's talk about scripts and hooks.

#### scrips: `npm start`

Starts Jest in the `--watch` mode.

You might be wondering right now why use Jest in a watch mode as a development
environment for the library? Before giving you my take on this, I would like to
quote a few things from [an awesome article][kenneth-wheelerino] by
[@kenwheeler][magnificent-beast] about his approach to OSS:

> These days I don’t write a single line of code until I’ve done a mock fantasy
> API of what I wish it would work like. It changes over time when you have to
> make it real, but its a great target to strive for. You’ll know when the API
> is right because YOU will feel like using it.

> If you do anything at all, write some god damn tests. Pretty please. With a
> cherry on top. It would have saved me so much time and grief.

So there are two important points mentioned here:

1.  Think thoroughly about the API before starting the implementation
2.  Cover your stuff with tests, this will save you a lot of time later

I strongly agree with with these points _(and with all the other ones in the
article, so if you never read it before, give it a go!)_ and I think that using
Jest in watch mode puts you in the nicest environment to think about these
things while working on your library right away!

#### scrips: `npm test`

Runs tests with Jest test framework. All supported Jest CLI flags would be
passed to the Jest test runner.

#### scrips: `npm run build`

Creates the production build of the library with [`microbundle`][microbundle].
All supported [`microbundle`][microbundle] CLI flags would be passed to the
[`microbundle`][microbundle].

Microbundle is really nice tool that is made with a purpose of producing tiny,
optimized modules with the help of Rollup. It also supports TypeScript and JSX
out of the box!

#### scrips: `npm run lint-staged`

This command is configured to run [prettier][prettier] and [eslint][eslint] on
specific files that are being staged in Git. Current setup will take into
account only javascript files in `src` or `test` folder and also `md` files all
across your project.

For example if you commit a tree of files that looks like this:

```
my-awesome-lib
├── what.js
├── test
│   └── my-awesome-lib.js
├── src
│   └── my-awesome-lib.test.js
└── README.md
```

`what.js` will be ignored, `my-awesome-lib.js` and `my-awesome-lib.test.js` will
be linted and prettified and `README.md` will be prettified.

#### hooks: `pre-commit`

Pre-commit hook will be triggered every time you commit files to git. This hook
will trigger `npm run lint-staged` command, that will lint and prettify some
files in your project.

#### hooks: `pre-push`

Pre-push hook will be triggered every time you push your changes. On this hook
`npm test` command will be triggered, preventing you from pushing code that is
not passing tests

#### Hooks toggling

Hooks configuration is under your full control in the `package.json` file under
the `husky.hooks` key. If you find any of those hooks are too much for you or
you want to add more, you can disable them by removing hook keys or adding a new
one. All Git hooks are supported by husky:

- `pre-commit`
- `prepare-commit-msg`
- `commit-msg`
- `post-commit`
- `post-checkout`
- `pre-rebase`

More information about these hooks and when they are triggered could be found in
Atlassian Git Tutorial under the [Local Hooks][hooks] section

## Contributing

Feel free to submit issues and/or PRs if you found some bugs! 🐞 The
documentation improvements will be super appreciated, if you feel that they are
lacking in some places 📝👩🏻‍🔬

The workflow created by this library is opinionated but open for reasonable
changes. If you have some ideas how it can be improved or changed, please don't
hesitate to open an issue to start a discussion 👋

## What's next?

- [ ] `eject` command to easily opt-out of using custom scripts
- [ ] `TypeScript` starter templates
- [ ] `ReasonML` starter templates
      (https://github.com/developit/microbundle/issues/141)
  <!-- - [ ] Configurable REPL both for node and browser of some kind -->

## Kudos

A massive kudos goes to all the awesome tools that are used in this library and
toolboxes that inspired this project (in no particular order):

- [microbundle][microbundle]: Zero-configuration bundler for tiny modules.
- [Jest][jest]: 🃏 Delightful JavaScript Testing
- [Husky][husky]: Git hooks made easy
- [lint-staged][lint-staged]: Run linters on git staged files
- [Prettier][prettier]: An opinionated code formatter
- [ESLint][eslint]: Pluggable linting utility for JavaScript
- [create-react-app][cra]: Create React apps with no build configuration.

## License

[MIT](LICENSE)

[microbundle]: https://github.com/developit/microbundle
[jest]: https://jestjs.io/
[glitch]: https://glitch.com/
[npm]: https://glitch.com/
[github]: https://github.com/
[bitbucket]: https://bitbucket.org/product
[gitlab]: https://about.gitlab.com/
[gists]: https://gist.github.com/
[husky]: https://github.com/typicode/husky
[prettier]: https://prettier.io/
[eslint]: https://eslint.org/
[lint-staged]: https://github.com/okonet/lint-staged
[cra]: https://github.com/facebook/create-react-app
[hooks]: https://www.atlassian.com/git/tutorials/git-hooks#local-hooks
[kenneth-wheelerino]: https://medium.com/codezillas/a-bitter-guide-to-open-source-a8e3b6a3c1c4
[magnificent-beast]: https://twitter.com/ken_wheeler
